Who are you?!

We are Veteran Unix Admins and we are concerned about what is happening
to Debian GNU/Linux to the point of considering a fork of the project.

And why would you do that?

Some of us are upstream developers, some professional sysadmins: we are
all concerned peers interacting with Debian and derivatives on a daily
basis.

We don't want to be forced to use systemd in substitution to the
traditional UNIX sysvinit init, because systemd betrays the UNIX
philosophy.

We contemplate adopting more recent alternatives to sysvinit, but not
those undermining the basic design principles of "do one thing and do it
well" with a complex collection of dozens of tightly coupled binaries
and opaque logs.

Are there better solutions than forking?

Yes: vote Ian Jackson's proposal to preserve freedom of choice of init
systems.

Then make sure sysvinit stays the default for now, systemd can be
optional.

Debian leaders can go on evaluating more init systems, just not impose
one that ignores the needs of most of its users.

Why don't you do that yourselves?

We are excluded from voting on the issue: only few of us have the time
and patience to interact with Debian on a voluntary basis.

Now we do what we can, hoping our concerns will be heard by those who
can cast a vote about it.

    [edit/clarification]
    Since this seems to be one of the most prominent critiques, we'd like to clarify this point.
    With lack of time and patience we refer to our possibility to be involved in a complex
    bureaucratic system like the one governing Debian. While we respect this way of working,
    we think that our time is better invested in new directions, also according to our expertise.

Is really all this fuss necessary?

To quote Ian Jackson:

"This resolution is not only important within Debian, and not only for
jessie (its next release). It is also important feedback for upstreams,
and our peer distros and downstreams".

Why is this happening in your opinion?

The current leadership of the project is heavily influenced by GNOME
developers and too much inclined to consider desktop needs as crucial to
the project, despite the fact that the majority of Debian users are
tech-savvy system administrators.

Can you articulate your critique to systemd?

To paraphrase Eric S. Raymond on the issue, we see systemd being very
prone to mission creep and bloat and likely to turn into a nasty
hairball over the longer term.

We like controlling the startup of the system with shell scripts that
are readable, because readability grants a certain level of power and
consciousness for those among us who are literate, and we believe that
centralizing control services, sockets, devices, mounts, etc., all
within one daemon is a slap in the face of the UNIX philosophy.

How long are your beards?

This is not a beard contest, rest assured the furry ones among us are
not sheeps.

To sum it up?

If systemd will be substituting sysvinit in Debian, we will fork the
project and create a new distro. We hope this won't be necessary, but we
are well prepared for it.

We need to talk.

Sure, write an email to VUA@debianfork.org.

Are you guys alone in this?

Not at all, there are more protests against the imposition of systemd on
users.

This article is a good introduction to the issue at hand: Systemd:
Harbinger of the Linux apocalypse.

There is the boycott systemd website providing several references.

Then there is the "systemd fork" called uselessd with some good points
and lots of lulz.

The wikipedia page lists also some critiques in its systemd reception
section.

With our protest we intend to represent the discontent of Debian users,
because that's who we are. We intend to keep using Debian on our
servers, or a fork if necessary. Others might have other goals, but we
all share a common problem: systemd being imposed on us.

Thanks for doing this. How can I help?

Cheers.

You can help by talking to fellow Debian developers and convince them of
how wrong is to betray a very big and relevant userbase by listening to
desktop needs.

Also it can be helpful to monitor and update the Wikipedia page about
systemd.

How are people reacting to your protest?

Here below some of the messages we are receiving. If you write us please
specify if you allow us to quote your nick, else we may quote you
anonymously, or not quote you at all if you specify so.


       I'm with you guys in the way that systemd is not the way forward. But I do
       not think that sysvinit is the way forward either. Maybe another init
       system? Like GNU DMD? I know its still pretty immature, but I think it's a
       good init system. I don't think sysvinit is ever going to make a comeback.

       And forking Debian? That's a very hard feat. Debian is the biggest Linux
       distro to date with hundreds of developers and at least 10 times as much
       users. And you'll have to change a lot of things from upstream. Even
       Ubuntu decided to use systemd instead of having to change the base init to
       upstart. Perhaps going to Slackware instead? That's what I use. Its very
       UNIX like. If that's what you strive for.


    Thank you so much for this. I've been using Debian since Hamm and this
    systemd nonsense has me ready to jump ship.


       I don't know who is behind that email, but sincerely, thank you for
       doing this.  I'm an UNIX/Linux sysadmin for nearly 20 years, I am
       nowadays dealing with a 5k servers which consists of nearny 90%
       debian systems. I've been a long time opponent to systemd, first
       because I read the code (thing that too few of that crap's zealots
       do), and ultimately because I tried it. That thing is a desktop
       toy, and even then, it has failed me on 50% of the cases. Its very
       nature is an abomination to UNIX principles and me and my team,
       colleagues, friends on the sysadmin field are *VERY* worried (to
       say the least) on what's coming.  Please keep that movement going,
       make it strong, and if you want a hand, count me in.

      Again, thank you.


    I've been using runit as my init system on debian wheezy/jessie for a
    while now and it works pretty well. glad to see the effort though on
    debianfork.org . cool.


       Do you realize that there's already more than 150 Debian
       derivative?  Instead of doing one more, you're better off helping
       one of the already existing derivatives. Writing "fork" is the joke
       part, since that would only be a derivative, unless every Debian
       Developer follows you, which will *not* happen.

       Also, instead of just writing words on the internet, wouldn't you
       think that helping some of the systemd alternative be a lot more
       productive?

       FYI, I don't like systemd either. And I've been maintaining OpenRC
       in Debian, and trying to push for it to work on as many arch as
       possible.  Though I currently don't have the time for it (for
       professional and personal reasons), and some others are a bit
       taking over the work, but it's not going as fast as it should. Some
       help would be awesome, and would help a way better than writing
       funny text on the net.


    I will support you guys with code if the fork goes ahead. But kindly
    think of another name.


       Why don't you guys help out with Debian LTS? No systemd there, and
       they need help at the moment.


    I'm in, at least in general.  "because readability grants a certain
    level of power and consciousness for those among us who are literate"

    I'd edit that to add that systemd is for software devs, but sysvinit
    is for sysadmins.  Sysadmins can debug shell scripts, but not
    necessarily debug and recompile systemd, which will of course be
    necessary in the course of admin duties.  Excessive product tying and
    complication for the sake of complication takes away the ability of
    admins to administer, which is highly counter productive.  The
    response from the systemd astroturfers is invariably along the lines
    of software, especially our software, will never have bugs (LOL)

    "Pure Debian by Veteran Unix Admins." any other name has to be better
    than that.  At least try not to violate trademarks by putting in (tm).

    You missed an excellent lack of freedom argument.  There will be only
    one way to do it and it will be mandatory and all else will be
    forbidden and only one guy gets to decide.  Intentional
    incompatibility is a pretty screwed up way to go thru life.  It does
    not help that most of the new features and abilities of systemd appear
    totally useless.  If one mp3 player was useless and awful, that would
    be OK, unless the inquisition extinguished all other mp3
    players... that would suck.  Although this is whats being done with
    systemd.

    And the embrace extend extinguish issue.  If submarine software
    patents sink apache (unlikely, but possible) then I don't really care
    although the emergency conversion to nginx might be a PITA for a day. 
    When the one and only init system to bind them all is subverted either
    by submarine patent or security holes then the temporary work around
    will be to install the xyz package to switch to ... well I guess it'll
    be impossible and I'd have to switch to freebsd.

    There is a cost - benefit ratio issue.  Most of what systemd is
    capable of doing is unfortunately completely useless and irrelevant in
    comparison to what is being lost WRT to ease of debugging and
    reliability and security and freedom.  If the costs were low/zero, the
    useless features it provides would likely still not be worth it, but
    at least the ratio would make it less awful.  To some extent the whole
    situation is a farce.  You've got software devs deciding what desktop
    users that don't exist want, while ignoring actual current desktop
    users, and they're re-applying that "successful" (LOL) development
    model to screw over sysadmins, and we're not subject to being told
    what we want by non-admins.  Its a very arrogant business model.


       If/when you start publishing work for your fork

       Can you see if it can be documented in a way those of us in the redhat
       world could take advantage of it? We have the same problem and concerns,
       well at least the could *nix admin in our shop. Myself included.

       We are also considering looking at alternatives and we all have used
       debian in the past and most use ubuntu for desktop (there is always that
       one mandrake guy) so I will be keeping an eye on this project as well.


    Whatever the outcome you have my support !

    Using various Unices since System V on an ICL Clan 4, and as long-time
    BSD, Slackware and Debian user, I just don’t want systemd imposed on
    me, whatever the purpose. Whether it’s total crap, a good idea or a
    mix of both, this has to be *optional* and surely not a default. I
    want to keep my servers and embedded systems bloat-free with only
    their intended software sets installed.  Why don’t *they* fork Debian
    and do whatever they want ? I like Debian the way it is (was) like a
    good grilled steak with nothing superfluous added, no fancy
    sauce. Thank you for your efforts !


       I've been on Linux for over 15 years, I'm also a contributor in
       Fedora and author of NetworkManager-ssh (SSH plugin for Network
       manager). I'm a sort of a cross between a sysadmin and developer,
       currently doing both.

       I'm predominantly a Fedora user (and contributor) and am thinking
       recently about forsaking Fedora in favour of something without
       systemd (was thinking PCBSD). I've been around Linux for a while
       and understand the core philosophy behind it and how systemd just
       betrays all of that. I actually had an argument with Mr. Pottering
       on the Fedora-dev list about having /var/log/messages having a
       binary format. When log files in linux will not be plain text -
       it'll be the end in my opinion. needless to say Pottering didn't
       agree with me and tried to shut me up.

       Pottering somehow managed to push systemd quite far in Fedora and
       at the moment I'm in absorption mode trying to digest WTF happened
       to my Fedora with systemd. Horrow show.

       If this fork goes forward, I promise to try and do my best to
       contriube as much as possible. I'm good with packaging and shell, I
       believe I will be able to help. I think you guys hit the nail on
       the head with your web page and you have my full support.

       Lets not let our voice be silenced


       As a veteran (20+ years; Solaris, HP-UX, RHEL, Debian) sysadmin who
       prefers Debian over everything for use on about 40 GUIless servers,
       it's either this (a fork away from systemd) or I move away from
       Debian altogether.


    Many thanks for the effort here, while it's not a big thing to replace
    systemd on jessie/sid installation with sysvinit, it's not easy to
    create an installer image which installs the OS without systemd. I
    made an image which you can find on
    http://without-systemd.org/debian-jessie/ The big problem is tasksel,
    tasksell will install all Packages with the priorities required,
    important and standard. Unfortunately systemd has the priority
    importand and will be installed again, if you select "standard system
    utilities" in tasksel, to fix that, i would have to create my own
    Debian repository :-(

    I hope for a solution without a fork. But if you need help with
    forking, please contact me.


       I support your idea of forking Debian to exclude systemd and its
       multitude of tentacles. Please follow through. Also, please make
       available means by which us mere users (though I've got
       kernel-hacking and systems-architecture ambitions myself) may
       participate in an effective way.

       As I see it, the simplest way to fork Debian as of october 2014
       would entail taking a full-system snapshot (per package versions),
       available from snapshot.d.o, from a time before systemd
       dependencies were introduced, and then adding on top any updates
       that didn't add such. This would re-use nearly all mainline Debian
       effort and require only porting of e.g. eudev from other
       systemd-less distributions. Of course GNOME would have to go;
       fortunately there is MATE.


    Thanks for doing this. I run four Debian servers in production, three
    of which are connected to an IRC network. Gnome remains the default DE
    on Debian for accessibility reasons, so it's obvious they have the
    monopoly of votes in favor of systemd. Large companies like Red Hat
    are also backing destroying the UNIX-philosophies.

    Once I heard Debian would be making the switch to systemd, I've been
    slowly migrating all Debian servers over to OpenBSD over the impending
    death of Debian. There's still much that leaves me missing Debian,
    most importantly the large amount of different packages that are not
    available in OpenBSD and would take lots of effort to port over.


       I have been worried about systemd colonizing all the linux distros
       for a long time and it's really happening. I want users to retain
       freedom to use the init system they choose rather than being locked
       in.

       The debian mailing list vote about whether to switch to systemd was
       atrocious, in no way did it come to a consensus but they still
       forced this upon us? This was the reason I quit using debian. If
       you look around there are very few remaining distros that aren't
       getting taken over by systemd!

       Your project is a good idea and I wish you the best.


